pH-responsive and switchable triplex-based DNA hydrogels

### Abstract

New methods for the preparation of reversible pH-responsive DNA hydrogels based on Hoogsteen triplex structures are described. One system consists of a hydrogel composed of duplex DNA units that bridge acrylamide chains at pH = 7.4 and undergoes dissolution at pH = 5.0 through the reconfiguration of one of the duplex bridging units into a protonated CG · C<sup>+</sup> triplex structure. The second system consists of a hyarogel consisting of acrylamide chains crosslinked in the presence of an auxiliary strand by Hoogsteen TA · T triplex interaction at pH = 7.0. The hyarogel transforms into a liquid phase at pH = 10.0 due to the separation of the triplex bridging units. The two hyarogel systems undergo reversible and cyclic hydrogel/solution transitions by subjecting the systems to appropriate pH values. The anti-cancer drug. coralyne, binds specifically to the TA · T triplex-crosslinked hydrogel thereby increasing its stiffness. The pH-controlled release of the coralyne from the hydrogel is demonstrated.

### Introduction

Stimuli-responsive polymers undergoing reversible hydrogel/ solution transitions attract substantial interest in material science.<sup>1</sup> Different triggers such as pH,<sup>2</sup> chemical substrates,<sup>3</sup> redox reactions,<sup>4</sup> supramolecular interactions,<sup>5</sup> light<sup>6</sup> and elec- trical signals<sup>7</sup> were used to switch these phase transitions of polymers. Different applications of switchable polymers undergoing hydrogel/solution transitions were suggested, and these include the controlled drug delivery,<sup>8</sup> tissue engineering,<sup>1a</sup> micromechanical devices such as valves or actuators,<sup>9</sup> sensors,<sup>10</sup> and smart coating materials.<sup>11</sup> Within the stimuli-responsive polymers undergoing solution/hydrogel transitions, DNA-con- taining switchable hydrogels attract special interest, since the nucleic acid components can be encoded with appropriate base sequences that provide the mechanisms for the switchable hydrogel/solution phase transitions.<sup>12</sup> The stimuli-responsive DNA hydrogels may be synthesized by two general approaches: by one approach, DNA units are crosslinked by stimuli- responsive nucleic acid bridging units to yield the switchable hydrogel.<sup>13</sup> The second approach, involves the tethering of nucleic acids, that are encoded with stimuli-responsive base sequences, on polymer chains, and the crosslinking of the chains by appropriate external triggers to form the hydrogels.<sup>14</sup> By coding programmed base sequences into the bridging units exhibiting reversible and switchable crosslinking properties, stimuli-responsive matrices undergoing reversible hydrogel/ solution were designed. Different external signals were used to trigger the reversible DNA-stimulated formation and dissocia- tion of hydrogels. These included the use of nucleic acid duplex bridging units and their separation by the strand displacement process,<sup>15</sup> the bridging and separation of the polymer chains by K+-ion-stabilized G-quadruplexes and crown ether receptors,<sup>16</sup> and the use of metal ions to bridge the polymer chains to hydrogels and to separate the hydrogels by ligands eliminating the metal ions.<sup>17</sup> Also, the pH-triggered formation of i-motif structures was applied to bridge DNA units to yield all-DNA hydrogels.<sup>13b</sup> Different applications of DNA-based hydrogels were suggested, including sensing,<sup>18</sup> removal of hazardous metal ions,<sup>19</sup> inscription of structural information,<sup>20</sup> and the use of the nucleic acid functionalized polymers as shape-memory matrices.<sup>21</sup>

Hoogsteen base interactions allow the pH-stimulated formation and dissociation of triplex DNA structures. Specifically, protonated CG·C<sup>+</sup> parallel domains favor the formation of triplex structures at acidic pH<sup>22</sup>, and TA·T parallel domains stimulate triplex formation at neutral pH environments. <sup>23</sup> The pH-triggered switchable transitions duplex/triplex structures of nucleic acids were previously implemented to develop DNA machines<sup>24</sup> and switches.<sup>25</sup> In the present report, we present the use of triplex DNA structures as pH triggers that stimulate switchable and reversible hydrogel/solution transitions. We demonstrate that through a rational design of the nucleic acid crosslinking units and their pH-induced triplex nanostructures， the dictated transitions of DNA matrices existing as hydrogels at neutral pH, into liquid phases proceed either under acidic or basic conditions. We further demonstrate that the anti-cancer drug, coralyne, intercalates specifically into the TA·T triplex crosslinked hydrogel. Besides the increase of the stiffness of the hydrogel through the intercalation process, the pH-controlled release of the coralyne from the hydrogel is demonstrated.

### Results and discussion

Fig. 1A depicts the synthesis and characterization of the DNA hydrogel undergoing hydrogel/liquid transitions upon triggering the system between pH = 7.4 and pH = 5.0. The acrydite nucleic acid  (1) was polymerized in the presence of acrylamide to yield copolymer chains (3) composed of the (1)-tether- ：acrylamide with ratio corresponding to 1:110, average molecular weight 800 000. Similarly, the acrydite nucleic acid (2) was polymerized in the presence of acrylamide to yield the



